

===== PAGE 1 =====
The Visual Computer
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-023-02770-9
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Illumination estimation for nature preserving low-light image
enhancement
Kavinder Singh1 · Anil Singh Parihar1
Accepted: 5 January 2023
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2023
Abstract
In retinex model, images are considered as a combination of two components: illumination and reﬂectance. However, decom-
posing an image into the illumination and reﬂectance is an ill-posed problem. This paper presents a new approach to estimate
the illumination for low-light image enhancement. This work contains three major tasks: estimation of structure-aware initial
illumination, reﬁnement of the estimated illumination, and the ﬁnal correction of lightness in reﬁned illumination. We have
proposed a novel approach for structure-aware initial illumination estimation leveraging a new multi-scale guided ﬁltering
approach. The algorithm reﬁnes proposed initial estimation by formulating a new multi-objective function for optimization.
Further, we proposed a new adaptive illumination adjustment for correction of lightness using the estimated illumination.
The qualitative and quantitative analysis on low-light images with varying illumination shows that the proposed algorithm
performs image enhancement with color constancy and preserves the natural details. The performance comparison with
state-of-the-art algorithms shows the superiority of the proposed algorithm.
Keywords Low-light image · Illumination estimation · Retinex · Image enhancement · Guided ﬁltering
1 Introduction
Images with good illumination are always desirable in the
design of any vision-based system. However, many times
the environment is not conducive to capture an image with
good illumination and results in a low-light image. The
other cause of low-light images may be variable lightness
in a scene, night-time imaging, improper camera setting,
bad lighting sources, etc. Sometimes an image may con-
tain two types of regions: regions with properly illuminated
objects and regions with poorly illuminated objects (i.e. the
image with varying illumination). Low-light images pose
challenges in object and feature detection and may degrade
theperformanceofavision-basedsystem[7,13,16,36,51,54].
Low-light image enhancement may improve the visual qual-
ity of an image. However, an inferior enhancement algorithm
B Anil Singh Parihar
parihar.anil@gmail.com
Kavinder Singh
kavinder85@gmail.com
1
Machine Learning Research Laboratory, Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Delhi Technological
University, Delhi, India
may result in the loss of crucial details and introduce unde-
sirable artifacts. Thus, designing an effective algorithm for
the enhancement of low-light images is a challenging task.
Inliterature,researchershaveproposedlow-lightenhance-
ment algorithms based on contrast enhancement [4,43],
retinex theory [22–24], deep learning [41,52,58,63], and
other approaches [8,42,62]. However, most of the low-light
image enhancement algorithms suffer from one or more of
the following limitations:
– Algorithms [5,12,14,25] provide inadequate enhance-
ment of non-uniformly illuminated images i.e. over-
enhancement in the bright regions or under-enhancement
in dark regions.
– Algorithms [5,12,25,42] provide enhanced images with
unnatural colors, i.e. fail to preserve natural colors.
– Algorithms [12,42,53] provide undesired artifacts in the
enhanced images.
– Algorithms [12,14,25] are unable to restrict the disper-
sion effect in light dominant regions of the low-light
image with varying illumination.
– Algorithms [12,14,25] result in loss of ﬁner details.
123


===== PAGE 2 =====
K. Singh, A. S. Parihar
Fig. 1 Results of different algorithms on image birds. (a) Input image;
(b) Patch of (a); (c) NPEA [53]; (d) Patch of (c); (e) PIRE [5]; (f) Patch
of (e); (g) LIME [12]; (h) Patch of (g); (i) SRLIME [25]; (j) Patch of
(i); (k) LECARM [42]; (l) Patch of (k); (m) LSDD [14]; (n) Patch of
(m); (o) Zero-DCE [11]; (p) Patch of (o); (q) CSDGAN [32]; (r) Patch
of (q); (s) Proposed method; (t) Patch of (s)
In general, there is a trade-off between lightness enhance-
ment and naturalness preservation, i.e. if an algorithm
preserves naturalness, then the overall lightness is low and
vice versa. In this paper, we proposed a new low-light image
enhancement approach to overcome the limitations men-
tioned above. The proposed algorithm considers the retinex
model of image formation. In the retinex model, an image
contains two components: illumination and reﬂectance. The
estimation of illumination and reﬂectance from an image
is ill-posed. The proposed algorithm estimates illumina-
tion of an image and leverages the retinex model to obtain
reﬂectance component. We estimate the structure-aware ini-
tial illumination using the proposed multiple box (window)
sizes in the guided ﬁlters [15]. We reﬁne the initial illumina-
tion by formulating and solving a new multi-objective opti-
mization function. The proposed objective function involves
ﬁdelity between the initial illumination and reﬁned illumi-
nation. Thus, initial illumination plays a deﬁning role in
obtaining the reﬁned illumination. At last, we apply the
proposed adaptive illumination adjustment to improve the
lightness of the image based on the estimated illumination.
The proposed algorithm is termed Nature Preserving Low-
light Image Enhancement (NPLIE).
The importance of proposed NPLIE can be demonstrated
using an image with varying illumination shown in Fig. 1,
where bird is illuminated but other details are darker. It
may be noticed that most algorithms are struggling to give
natural enhancement. Some of the algorithms [12,42,53]
try to enhance darker regions; however, already illuminated
regions get over-enhanced in the process. The other algo-
rithms [5,11,14,32] try to maintain a natural look by avoiding
over-enhancement but fail to enhance signiﬁcant lightness
in darker regions. On the other hand, the proposed NPLIE
enhancesdarkerregionsoftheimagewithoutover-enhancing
already illuminated regions. The detailed analysis is shown
in Sect. 4.4.
The major contributions of this work are as follows:
– Proposed a new approach to estimate initial illumination
leveraging the proposed multi-scale guided ﬁlter. The
guided ﬁlter uses single box size due to which it is unable
to achieve textural smoothening and structural preser-
vation simultaneously. Thus, we propose multi-scale
guided ﬁlter using multiple box sizes to achieve adequate
textural smoothening while preserving the structural
details.
– Formulated and proposed a new multi-objective opti-
mization problem with a new regularization term to
effectively preserve structural details in the reﬁned illu-
mination while smoothening the textural details. We
solved the above optimization problem using Alternative
Direction Minimization (ADM) algorithm [55].
– Proposed a new approach for adaptive illumination
adjustment to improve the overall lightness of the
low-light image using the estimated illumination. The
proposed adaptive illumination adjustment increases
the lightness in darker region, while maintaining the
lightness of the bright regions by using the proposed
illumination estimation to manage the lightness. Thus,
it results in the natural enhancement of low light
images.
– We performed an exhaustive analysis of the proposed
approach on various datasets [17,30,42,53,56,57] using
qualitative and qualitative analysis and compared with
state-of-the-art algorithms.
The remaining paper is organized as follows. Section 2
contains Related Work. Section 3 brieﬂy describes the pro-
posed methodology. Section 4 presents results and analysis.
Section 5 concludes the proposed approach and ﬁndings.
123


===== PAGE 3 =====
Illumination estimation for nature preserving low-light image enhancement
2 Related work
Many researchers have attempted to develop algorithms for
image enhancement [19,21,46]. Low-light images contain
most of the low-intensity pixels, and they are loosely con-
sidered low-contrast images. Histogram equalization-based
approaches[37,38]arethemoststraight-forwardapproaches.
These algorithms focus on contrast enhancement rather than
improving the illumination of the image. Thus, they some-
times fail to improve the contrast of low-light images.
Retinex [24,33] based enhancement algorithms work
reasonably well for low-light images. Many authors [5,
14,25,34,35,50] have attempted simultaneous estimation
of illumination and reﬂectance. Fu et al. [5] proposed a
method for computing both components simultaneously with
probabilistic-based prior (PIRE). The algorithm [5] works
well for objects with proper illumination in a low-light
image, but the enhancement is limited in darker regions. Li
et al. [25] proposed SRLIME for simultaneous estimation
of reﬂectance, illumination, and noise from an image. Hao et
al.proposedsemi-decoupleddecomposition(LSDD)[14]for
low-light image enhancement. It considers the inherent noise
in the reﬂectance. SRLIME and LSDD algorithms provide
good color constancy. However, the algorithms [14,25] result
in degraded images due to over smoothening in many images.
Wang et al. [50] proposed a method for image decomposi-
tion using total generalized variation regularization and H1
decomposition. In general, the complexity of algorithms esti-
mating both illumination and reﬂectance is high. Thus, these
algorithms may not be useful for real-time applications.
Another set of algorithms [6,12,53] estimate the illumi-
nation and use it to ﬁnd the reﬂectance. Wang et al. [53]
proposed Naturalness Preserved Enhancement Algorithm
(NPEA) to deal with non-uniform illumination. NPEA pre-
serves naturalness at the cost of illumination improvement.
Thus,darkerregionsmaynotenhanceadequately.Fuetal.[6]
proposed a method that uses multi-fusion to deal with weak
illumination. The algorithm fails to provide signiﬁcant light-
ness for a darker region. Guo et al. [12] proposed a low-light
image enhancement algorithm using illumination map esti-
mation (LIME). The performance of LIME is signiﬁcantly
good. However, over enhancement occurs in properly illumi-
nated regions of low-light images. Moreover, LIME fails to
retain color constancy.
Researchers endeavored data-driven approaches in image
dehazing [3,20,64,65], image deraining [49], underwater
image enhancement [27] and low-light image enhancement
[26,29,31,47]. To this end, Shen et al. [45] proposed MSR-
net, a neural network-based approach to implement MSR.
Wei et al. [56] proposed Retinex-Net, for image decom-
position and illumination mapping. Retinex-Net performs
denoising of reﬂectance component. Zhang et al. [66] pro-
posed kindling in darkness (KID) for the decomposition
of images. Yu et al. [59] developed a modular low-light
enhancement network using feature aggregation and atten-
tion. Li et al. [26] proposed a low-light image enhancement
network based on attention method, and stacking method. Yu
et al. [61] presented a low-light image enhancement method
using two-stage decomposition and regulator method. Song
et al. [47] proposed a spatial feature pyramid network for
enhancementoflow-lightimages.Themethod[47]usesthree
convolution kernels on spatial pyramid network to obtain fea-
tures of distinct scales. The learning-based methods require
a huge set of low-light and enhanced images. Moreover,
the learning-based methods work well for data similar to
the test images. However, these methods may provide lim-
ited enhancement while dealing with signiﬁcantly different
images.
Yu and Zhu [60] proposed a physical model-based algo-
rithm, which considers the environmental light and scattering
attenuation rate. Ren et al. [42] proposed LECARM, which
uses a camera response model for the enhancement of low-
light images. Ghosh et al. [9] proposed an adaptive bilateral
ﬁlter-based textural smoothing. Wang et al. [48] proposed a
fast method based on exposure fusion to enhance the details
in multiple regions in the image using local Laplacian ﬁl-
ters. Rahman et al. [39] developed a wavelet transform-based
multi-scale decomposition and denoising method.
3 Nature preserving low-light image
enhancement (NPLIE)
In this section, we describe the details of proposed NPLIE.
The algorithm uses three major modules for low-light image
enhancement. First, NPLIE estimates initial illumination
leveraging the proposed multi-scale guided ﬁlter. The algo-
rithm uses multiple boxes to achieve textural smoothening
while preserving the structural details. Second, we reﬁne
the initial illumination using the formulated multi-objective
optimization function. NPLIE estimates reﬂectance using the
reﬁned illumination. Lastly, the algorithm adjusts the reﬁned
illumination using the proposed adaptive illumination adjust-
ment to obtain the ﬁnal illumination with corrected lightness.
NPLIE combines the ﬁnal illumination with the reﬂectance
to provide an enhanced image. This work considers Retinex
[23] image formation model, which can be deﬁned as:
J = R ◦I
(1)
where J is an image, R is reﬂectance of the image, I is
illumination, and symbol ‘◦’ represents element-wise multi-
plication.
In earlier work [18,40], a smooth image is considered as an
estimate of illumination. However, direct smoothening using
a center/surround function does not capture the character-
123


===== PAGE 4 =====
K. Singh, A. S. Parihar
Fig. 2 Results of House. a Original Image; b Illumination of LIME; c
Illumination of Proposed method; d LIME [12]; e Proposed Method
istics of non-uniform illumination. In dark regions, most of
the information about illumination is available on the channel
with the maximum intensity value [6,12,53]. A set of algo-
rithms [6,12,53] use pixel-wise maximum across all color
channels (bright-channel) as initial illumination. However,
the bright-channel of low-light images may not represent
true illumination. An image is indeed a 2D representation
of 3D scenes (real world). Therefore, two adjacent objects
in an image may be far distant in reality, and illumination in
such cases may also vary. However, maximum intensity for
two adjacent objects may be similar, and bright-channel will
not distinguish their illumination. Moreover, in the surround-
ing region of a light source, the bright-channel estimation
produces a scattering effect during low-light enhancement.
It can be observed from Fig. 2 that the bright channel as
initial illumination generates undesired artifacts. Thus, we
proposed a structure-aware initial illumination instead of a
bright-channel to address the above issue.
3.1 Structure-aware initial illumination estimation
In any optimization-based approach, initial illumination
plays a deﬁning role as it acts as a reference for reﬁned
illumination. One may notice in the red box of Fig. 2 that
structural details are lost in Fig. 2d (in case of LIME), while
details are preserved in Fig. 2e (in case of NPLIE). Sim-
ilarly, the artifacts are prominently visible on the pillar in
the green box of Fig. 2d. The analysis of illumination esti-
mation can help to understand these losses of details and
artifacts, as shown in Fig. 2b. One may notice that illumi-
nation is changing abruptly, which is quite unnatural. Thus,
a structure-aware illumination estimation is highly desirable
in images with non-uniform light conditions. The textural
details of the image have almost no effect on the spatial vari-
ation of the illumination. Thus, the illumination of an image
may be considered to be independent of textural details. The
algorithm should smoothen textural details while preserving
structural details to achieve an actual (or near actual) estima-
tion of the illumination. In the proposed method, we develop
an algorithm for structure-aware estimation of initial illumi-
nation by proposed multi-scale guided ﬁltering.
Fig. 3 Initial illumination with bmin, bm, bmax, LIME (i.e. simple max-
imum intensity) and Proposed method in (4) respectively
In guided ﬁltering [15], there is a fundamental assump-
tion of linear relation between the guidance image (J) and
the smoothen image (Jb). The linear model in guided ﬁl-
ter ensures that the smoothen image contain an edge only
if the input image has an edge. However, near strong edges
gradient of each parameter of the ﬁlter is expected to be
very small. Therefore, it is expected that the ﬁltering should
preserve structural details while smoothening the textural
details. However, it also depends on the box size and image
content inside the box.
In case of a box with high variance, the smoothen image
retains maximum details from the guidance image which
causes structural details preservation. In case of a box with
low variance, the smoothen image captures the mean of the
box ﬁlter that causes smoothening of textural details. The
smaller box generally results in low variance as the details
do not change much within the box (except abrupt changes
i.e. dominant structural details). Thus, it will perform textural
smoothening with dominant structural details preservation.
However, the overall smoothening will be low if we con-
sider a very small box size (i.e. small neighborhood). As
we increase the box size, the variance will increase primar-
ily due to two reasons: (i) Higher probability of including
high detailed regions; and (ii) The variation inside the box
is high due to larger spatial region coverage. The larger box
size will result in better structural retention with slightly less
contrast as it tries to pull all the values near the mean of
the large region. From the above discussion, we noticed that
smaller box size results in better textural smoothening with
only dominant structural details preservation. On the other
hand, larger box sizes result in better structural details preser-
vation with compromised textural smoothening. Thus, it is
intuitive to use some intermediate box size between bmin and
bmax. However, it is empirically observed that the intermedi-
ate box also fails to give desired illumination estimation and
contains somedrawbacks of bothbmin andbmax. It shows that
the guided ﬁlter with a single box size is unable to perform
the textural smoothening and structural preservation simul-
taneously, which is required for illumination. We propose to
use three different box sizes bmin, bm, and bmax to obtain
structure-aware smoothening. However, the above relation
is an approximate relation; thus, we performed exhaustive
123


===== PAGE 5 =====
Illumination estimation for nature preserving low-light image enhancement
Fig. 4 Framework of structure-aware initial illumination estimation
experimentation on a large set of images to analyse the effect
of the box size in section 4.1.
We empirically observed that box size eight provides good
textural smoothening as shown in Fig. 3a. Thus, we select
the minimum box size as eight, i.e. bmin = 8. However, bmin
fails to preserve the structural details near the pillar region
in Fig. 3a. On the other hand maximum box size i.e. bmax
preserves the structural details; however, it fails to smoothen
the textural details signiﬁcantly as shown in Fig. 3c. The
maximum box size, bmax is computed as:
bmax = round(min(H, W)/2)
(2)
where H and W represents number of rows and columns of
the image respectively. Intuitively, we consider intermediate
box size (bm) for trade-off between bmin and bmax. However,
intermediate box size also fails to give desired illumination
and contains some drawbacks of both boxes. bm is computed
as:
bm = round((bmin + bmax)/2)
(3)
Theframeworkofstructure-awareinitialilluminationesti-
mation is shown in Fig. 4. In ﬁrst step, guided ﬁlters with
box sizes bmin, bm, and bmax are applied to the low-light
image. Then, the pixel-wise max operation is performed
across all three color channels on each output images of
guided ﬁlters. This results in three max channels correspond-
ing to each box size (max guided channels). Finally, the
pixel-wise max operation is applied on above three max
guided channels to achieve the structure-aware initial illu-
mination. Fig. 3 shows the results of initial illumination for
smoothened image (using bmin, bm, and bmax), simple max-
imum operation (used in LIME), and the proposed method.
We consider maximum operation [12,42,53] to obtain the
effect of light in the initial illumination. It can be observed
from Fig. 3(d) that proposed initial illumination contains the
effect of light, structural preservation (at top near the grill),
and low textural details. For notational convenience, let us
consider b1 = bmin, b2 = bm, and b3 = bmax. The proposed
algorithm computes initial illumination as given below:
ˆI = max
i
 3

i=1
max
c∈{R,G,B}

Jc
bi

(4)
where ˆI denotes the initial illumination, Jc
bi denotes cth color
channel of the output image of guided ﬁlter with box size
bi, max denotes pixel-wise maximum, and (R, G, B) denotes
(red, green and blue) color channel of the image.
3.2 Formulated optimization for refined
illumination estimation
The proposed initial illumination gives a reasonably good
estimationofactualilluminationandresultsingoodenhance-
ment. However, the estimated illumination still contains
textural details and may result in over-enhancement. Thus,
there is a need for reﬁning the initial illumination while pre-
serving the structural details. To achieve a structure-aware
smoothening, we formulate the following multi-objective
optimization problem:
min
I
||ˆI −I||2
2 + α||∇Jm −∇I||2
2 + β||G ◦∇I||1
(5)
where I is the reﬁned illumination, ˆI is initial illumination
as obtained by (4), ∇denotes ﬁrst-order derivative operator,
∇Jm denotes maximum of ∇from all channels of J, G is a
weight matrix based on initial illumination as discussed later
in this section, || • ||p represents L p norm operator, and α
and β are the regularization parameters.
The ﬁrst term (i.e. ||ˆI −I||2
2) of (5) provides ﬁdelity
between initial illumination and reﬁned illumination. The
second term (i.e. ||∇Jm −∇I||2
2) pulls the gradient of the
reﬁned illumination towards the maximum gradient of input
image (∇Jm). It tries to maximize the structural details in
the illumination. The third term (i.e. ||G ◦∇I||1) provides
smoothness to minimize textural details. The second term of
(5)limitsthesmootheningeffectintroducedbythethirdterm,
while the third term prevents the second term from enhanc-
ing textural or noisy details. Thus, combining the second
and third terms results in preserving structural details and
smoothening textural details in the reﬁned illumination.
In the third term, weight matrix G plays a vital role in
smoothening of the textural details. The weights in matrix G
are calculated as below:
Gx = −log(∇xˆI)
(6)
where ∇x denotes ﬁrst-order derivative along horizontal
dimension.
Gy = −log(∇yˆI)
(7)
where ∇y denotes ﬁrst-order derivative along vertical dimen-
sion. The logarithm of derivatives assign a higher weight to
textural details, while reducing the importance of structural
details. Note that low gradient values characterize texture
123


===== PAGE 6 =====
K. Singh, A. S. Parihar
details, while high gradient values characterize structural
details. Thus, the minimization of the multi-objective func-
tion signiﬁcantly suppresses textural details and results in
textural smoothening, while reducing the smoothening effect
in structural details.
The efﬁcient solution of (5) can be obtained using the
Alternative Direction Minimization (ADM) algorithm [55].
The researchers [5,12,25] have proven the convergence of
optimizationproblemlikein(5)totheglobaloptimum.Letus
replace the term ∇I with an auxiliary variable K and rewrite
objective function in (5) as:
arg min
I, K
||ˆI −I||2
2 + α||∇Jm −K||2
2 + β||G ◦K||1
s.t.∇I = K
(8)
The multi-objective optimization which contains equality
constraint can use Lagrangian multiplier to compute the opti-
mum point. The equality constraint in (8) can be included in
the objective function using Lagrangian multiplier (L). The
augmented Lagrangian function of (8) is given as:
L = ||ˆI −I||2
2 + α||∇Jm −K||2
2 + β||G ◦K||1
+ϕ(L, ∇I −K)
(9)
where ϕ(L, ∇I−K) = ω
2 ||∇I−K||2
2+⟨L, ∇I−K⟩and ⟨·, ·⟩
denotes element-wise multiplication, ω is a positive penalty
term. The penalty term is required to control the rate of con-
vergence to the solution [55]. The optimization problem can
be solved easily by iteratively updating one variable while
considering others as constant. The separation of the opti-
mization problem (5) into sub-problems can simplify it. We
divide the proposed multi-objective function into two sub-
problems, sub-problem I, and sub-problem K. Sub-problem
I is formed using all terms of (9) which contain illumination
component. Sub-problem K is formed by considering the all
terms of (9) which contain equality constraint. Let us solve
both sub-problems using ADM [55] algorithm.
Sub-problem I Considering only terms related to the variable
I of (9), we obtain the following sub-problem at ith iteration:
Ii+1 = arg min
I
||ˆI −I||2
2 + ϕ(Li, ∇I −Ki)
(10)
This is a well-known least square problem and can be solved
by differentiating it with respect to I and putting it equal to
0:
I = 2ˆI + DT (ωK −L)
2 + ωDT D
(11)
where D denotes the matrix containing Dx and Dy, Dx is the
differencealongrowsandDyisthedifferencealongcolumns.
Multiplication, transpose, and inverses of large matrices may
be computationally inefﬁcient. Thus, we use the 2D-FFT
method by considering the condition of the circular bound-
ary, and compute I as:
Ii+1 = F −1
F

2ˆI
	
+ 
d∈{x,y} F c
Dd(ωiKi −Li)
	
2 + ωi 
d∈{x,y} F c
Dd
	
· F

Dd
	

(12)
where F denotes 2D-FFT operation, F c denotes complex
conjugate of 2D-FFT operation, F −1 denotes the inverse of
2D-FFT operation and 2 is a matrix equivalent to image size
having all elements 2. Here, all operations are element-wise.
Sub-problem K: The sub-problem K is obtained from (9) by
selecting terms related to K only. Thus, we have the following
sub-problem at ith iteration:
Ki+1 = arg min
K
α||∇Jm −K||2
2 + β||G ◦K||1
+ ω
2 ||∇I −K||2
2 + ⟨L, ∇I −K⟩
(13)
To solve the minimization problem (13), take derivative with
respect to K and equate it to zero. The value of a pixel in
an image cannot be negative. However, K can have negative
pixel values because of higher weights, which is inappro-
priate while dealing with images. Thus, the computation of
K requires normalization to deal with negative pixel values.
Shrinkage operation [12,25] helps in thresholding the val-
ues of the image. Hence, we can solve (13) using shrinkage
operation:
Ki+1 = S
β·G
2α+ωi
2α∇Jm + ω∇Ii+1 + Li
2α + ωi

(14)
where Sφ[x] = sign(x)max(|x| −φ, 0) and all operations
are element-wise. The value of parameters α and β are cho-
sen empirically. The parameters analysis shows that the best
values of α and β are 0.5 and 0.1 respectively. The detailed
analysis is discussed in section 4.6.
L and ω : The Lagrangian multiplier matrix L and penalty
term ω can be updated as follows:
Li+1 = Li + ωi(∇Ii+1 −Ki+1);
ωi+1 = ωiδ, δ > 1.
(15)
The above iterative algorithm needs suitable stopping cri-
teria to achieve an optimal solution. We can either consider a
threshold for the difference between Ii+1 and Ii (i.e. I i
error)
or work out the maximum number of iterations. We consid-
ered the second option and found the maximum number of
iterations using a large number of experiments with various
image datasets. We analyze the results and found that after
eight iterations, the proposed algorithm gives optimal results.
123


===== PAGE 7 =====
Illumination estimation for nature preserving low-light image enhancement
Algorithm 1: Reﬁned illumination estimation
Input: Proposed Structure-aware initial illumination ˆI, α & β
Initialization: I0 = K0 = L0 = 0, ω0= 1, δ = 1.5.
while not converged do
Update Ii+1 via (12);
Update Ki+1 via (14);
Update Li+1 via (15);
i=i+1;
end
Output: Reﬁned illumination I=Ii
Input image
LIME, γ = 0.5
LIME, γ = 0.8
Input image
LIME, γ = 0.5
LIME, γ = 0.8
Fig. 5 Lightness comparison in Shoe(top row) image and Wall(bottom
row)
image
after
enhancement
using
LIME
algorithm
(with
γ =[0.5,0.8])
Input image
LIME
Proposed method
Fig. 6 Input image, LIME with γ =0.8, and NPLIE with proposed adap-
tive illumination adjustment
Additionally, the algorithm often runs a larger number of
iteration without signiﬁcant improvement and results in the
wastage of computation power if we consider the threshold
difference. The whole procedure of estimating reﬁned illu-
mination is summarized in Algorithm 1, which covers all
details regarding variables initialization.
After estimation of illumination, we require to estimate
reﬂectance. Remember illumination is independent of color
channel; however, reﬂectance depends on color channel. The
estimated reﬂectance is given as:
Rc = Jc/I
(16)
where Rc is estimated reﬂectance of cth color channel and
division is element-wise.
3.3 Adaptive illumination adjustment
In traditional approaches for illumination adjustment, ﬁnd-
ing a suitable value for the adjusting factor (like gamma) for
all kinds of images is not feasible because images with differ-
ent illumination require different values of adjusting factor
for the same algorithm. LIME and many other algorithms
[5,12,25] use gamma correction for the adjustment of light-
ness in the image. For Fig. 5, LIME suggests suitable value of
γ = 0.8, which works well for image ’Wall’. However, in the
’Shoe’ image of Fig. 5, LIME results in over-enhancement
around the white corners of the shoe. One may work out
some lower value of gamma, say γ = 0.5. It addresses the
problem of over-enhancement (ignoring some dark patches)
in the image ’Shoe’ but fails to improve illumination in case
of the image ’Wall’. Thus, the same gamma value is unable
to deal with different types of images. Even if an algorithm
computes a different gamma value for different images, i.e.
image-dependent gamma, it will not handle images with
varying illumination. A global value of gamma is unable
to produce faithful enhancement of all the regions in images
with varying illumination. It can be observed from Fig. 6
that in one region (highlighted in the red box), LIME results
in over-enhancement, and the other region (highlighted in
the green box), it gives under-enhancement. Thus, to achieve
natural enhancement, we require an adaptive illumination
adjustment method that adopts the value according to the
local region of the low-light images. In this work, we devel-
oped an adaptive illumination adjustment method that uses
the local illumination properties of the image. The adaptive
illumination adjustment method is adapting automatically
according to the required enhancement in the regions. The
proposed approach eradicates over-enhancement and under-
enhancement in different regions of the image with varying
illumination. Thus, it helps in providing natural enhancement
for all types of images irrespective of illumination property.
The proposed illumination adjustment is given as:
I f = I·log(I)
(17)
where I f is the adjusted illumination estimation, and · rep-
resents the element-wise power operation. The logarithmic
function improves consistency in illumination of the image.
The proposed adaptive illumination adjustment uses the
properties of estimated illumination properties to manage the
lightness in the different regions of an image. The adaptive
illumination adjustment improves the lightness of dark-
regions and restricts the lightness of regions with normal
illumination. Note that the images are normalized between 0
to 1. The element-wise product of adjusted illumination and
reﬂectance provides an enhanced image. The ﬁnal enhanced
image is given as:
Jc
f = Rc ◦I f
(18)
where Jc
f is ﬁnal enhanced image.
123


===== PAGE 8 =====
K. Singh, A. S. Parihar
4 Experimental results and analysis
The proposed algorithm is analyzed and validated experi-
mentally. The performance is evaluated with both quantita-
tive and visual assessments. The time complexity is another
important aspect to assess the performance of an algorithm.
Thus, the computational cost is also analyzed for the pro-
posed approach. We tested the proposed method using a large
set of images (having varying illumination) taken from var-
ious image datasets: LECARM [42], NPEA [53], ExDark
Dataset [30], LOL Dataset [56], EnlightenGAN [17], MIT-
Adobe5k dataset [1] and NASA Database [57]. We compare
the performance of the proposed algorithm with other state-
of-the-art algorithms: NPEA [53], PIRE [5], LIME [12],
SRLIME [25], LECARM [42], LSDD [14], Zero-DCE [11],
and CSDGAN [32]. We have used codes and parameters (of
other algorithms) as available on the author’s websites/or as
provided by authors for a fair comparison.
4.1 Effect of box size on initial illumination
This section presents a detailed analysis of box size for ini-
tial illumination. As discussed in Sect. 3.1, single box size
is incapable of providing desirable initial illumination. We
propose initial illumination estimation using three box size
i.e. bmin, bm and bmax. For proper estimation of initial illu-
mination, we need to perform textural smoothening while
preserving the structural details. We investigated the behav-
ior of guided ﬁlters by varying the box size over 500 different
types of images i.e. covering all kind of detail variations. We
have shown three sample images for demonstration in Fig. 7.
For the purpose of analysis, we have divided an image into
three categories: low detailed regions, high detailed regions,
and mixed regions (regions with low details for smaller boxes
and high details for larger boxes, and vice versa).
Case I - Low detailed regions: In Fig. 7a and b, the area
highlighted with blue color shows the low detailed region in
the image, and the blue line in the plot shows variance with
respect to multiple box sizes. In such regions, variance is low
for a smaller box, and there is a slight change in variance as
we move from small box size to high box size because of
fewer details. The low variance of the box results in high
textural smoothening. In such regions, structural details are
unavailable; thus, there is no effect of the box size. Smaller
boxsizeinsuchregionsprovidesslightlyhighersmoothening
than the larger box size, which can be observed from variance
shown in the plot of Fig. 7a and b. In low detailed regions, box
size has less effect on variance as these regions do not contain
structural details. Such regions perform textural smoothening
for small and large box sizes due to low variance.
Case II - High detailed regions: In Fig. 7a and b, the area
highlighted with red color shows the high detailed region in
the image, and the red line in the plot shows the variance with
(a) Sample 1
(b) Sample 2
(c) Sample 3
Fig. 7 Effect of box size on variance. The plot shows variance of the
box with varying box size where x-axis denotes the box-size and y-axis
denotes the variance of respective box. In the plot, red line and blue
line show the effect of box size in region highlighted with red color and
blue color
(a) Reﬁned 1 (b) Reﬁned 2 (c) Reﬁned 3 (d) Reﬁned 4
Fig. 8 Assessment of reﬁned illumination
respect to multiple box sizes. Such regions contain textural
andhighstructural details. Smaller boxes insuchregions cap-
ture low variance, thus provides smoothening of the textural
details. In high detailed regions of an image, the variance of
a box increases sharply with an increase in box size up to
maximum variance as shown by the red curve of the plot in
Fig. 7a and b. High variance results in low smoothening thus,
results in the preservation of structural details. Moreover, the
smoothened image with a large box size appears to be faded
as it tries to pull all values towards the mean value of a large
region. The smaller box size performs textural smoothening
in the high detailed region, and the larger box size performs
structural preservation.
Case III - Mixed Regions: In Fig. 7c, the area highlighted
with red and blue color shows the mixed region in the image.
In Fig. 7c, the area highlighted with blue color in the sky is
a low detailed region. In this region, the variance is low for
123


===== PAGE 9 =====
Illumination estimation for nature preserving low-light image enhancement
Fig. 9 Graph for quantitative comparison between several reﬁned illu-
mination
smaller box sizes, resulting in higher textural smoothening.
However, when we increase the box size after some limit,
it will capture structural details due to which variance will
increase, resulting in structural preservation. On the other
hand, the red area and red curve in Fig. 7c shows a region
where initially the variance increases with an increase in box
size, but once the box starts to capture the low detailed region,
then the variance reduces. Thus, in such regions smaller box
provides textural smoothening, and the larger box provides
structural details preservation with slight textural smoothen-
ing as it captures comparably higher variance. Moreover,
intermediate box size in such regions helps in structural
preservation.
It is evident from the above analysis that the textu-
ral smoothening and structural preservation both cannot be
achieved simultaneously using a single scale guided ﬁlter. As
the textural smoothening and structural preservation depend
on box size, characteristics of the image, and the neighbor-
hood; thus, multiple box sizes are required to achieve textural
smoothening and structural preservation simultaneously. The
assessment of proposed initial and reﬁned illumination is dis-
cussed in the next section.
4.2 Assessment of initial and refined illumination
We analyzed the effect of the proposed initial and pro-
posed reﬁned illumination by comparing the performance
of various combinations (listed below). The following com-
binations of reﬁned illuminations are used for assessment:
– Reﬁned 1 : the bright channel (used in [12,42,53]) with
optimization used in [12,42].
– Reﬁned 2 : the proposed initial illumination with opti-
mization used in [12,42].
– Reﬁned 3 : the bright channel (used in [12,42,53]) with
the proposed optimization formulated in (5).
– Reﬁned 4 : the proposed initial illumination with the pro-
posed optimization formulated in (5).
These combinations (reﬁned 1 to 4) are chosen to analyze
the performance of the proposed initial illumination and the
proposed optimization formulated in (5). The performance
of the various combinations is analyzed by computing the
performance metrics on enhanced images. We performed an
exhaustive assessment on a large set of images, and some
of the visual results are shown in Fig. 8. It is evident from
Fig. 8a that reﬁned 1 provides over-enhancement near the
stands in the top image and near the cup in the bottom image.
Reﬁned 2 restricts the over-enhancement up to an extent, as
shown in Fig. 8b. It shows that the proposed initial illumi-
nation helps in restricting the over-enhancement. However,
the overall enhancement is limited as reﬁned 2 uses inade-
quate optimization. The result of reﬁned 3 is shown in Fig.
8c. Reﬁned 3 provides comparably better performance than
reﬁned 1 and reﬁned 2. It shows that the proposed optimized
reﬁnement restricts the over-enhancement after combining
withthebright channel. It canbeobservedthat theformulated
optimization provides superior enhancement as compared to
the optimization used in [12,42] with the bright channel and
the proposed initial illumination. Reﬁned 4 achieves superior
enhancement than other combinations. Reﬁned 4 uses pro-
posed initial illumination and proposed optimization, which
helps in achieving better enhancement. Hence, the reﬁned 4
(proposed method) is superior to any other combination of
the initial illumination and optimization.
Further, we performed quantitative analysis of the result-
ing images using Contrast Gain (CG) [5], Normalized Dis-
crete Entropy (DEN) [2], Information maximization-based
No-reference quality metric (NIQMC) [10], and Visual Infor-
mation Fidelity (VIF) [44]. For all performance measures,
the higher value is the better. Details of the measures are dis-
cussed in Sect. 4.4. Fig. 9 shows the quantitative assessment
of the above-mentioned combinations (reﬁned 1 to 4). Note:
we normalized all measures using division with the maxi-
mum for representation purposes. Fig. 9 shows that reﬁned
1 achieves good DEN and NIQMC. However, CG and VIF
are not good in case of reﬁned 1. Reﬁned 2 uses proposed
initial illumination, which improves the value of CG, DEN,
NIQMC, and VIF as shown in Fig. 9. In case of reﬁned 3,
the initial illumination is not appropriate, which results in
a decrease in the value of all performance measures except
CG. It is evident from Fig. 9 that the proposed approach (i.e.
reﬁned 4) performs better than other combinations for all
performance measures.
4.3 Assessment of proposed adaptive illumination
adjustment
We replaced the traditional gamma correction for lightness
improvement with the proposed adaptive illumination adjust-
ment in PIRE, LIME, SRLIME, and NPLIE to analyze its
effect. Fig. 10 shows the comparison of the proposed adap-
tive illumination adjustment and the traditional gamma with
PIRE, LIME, SRLIME, and NPLIE. It is evident from Fig. 10
123


===== PAGE 10 =====
K. Singh, A. S. Parihar
Table 1 Mean values of Quantitative Measures for various algorithms
Metric
NPEA
PIRE
LIME
SRLIME
LECARM
LSDD
Zero-DCE
CSDGAN
Proposed
CG
0.57
0.54
0.61
0.42
0.55
0.55
0.88
0.91
0.96
DEN
0.68
0.66
0.66
0.62
0.68
0.68
0.64
0.41
0.77
NIQMC
4.79
4.08
5.38
4.07
4.56
4.34
3.69
2.84
5.45
VIF
17.25
4.51
25.18
3.46
6.51
5.77
3.90
4.52
32.31
Table 2 Statistical analysis of one tail paired z-test for CG, DEN, NIQMC, and VIF
Metric
Algorithm X
NPEA
PIRE
LIME
SRLIME
LECARM
LSDD
Zero-DCE
CSDGAN
CG
Z-stat
23.87
27.51
18.43
32.97
24.68
25.61
6.02
3.28
p-value
0
0
0
0
0
0
8.89E-10
5.25E-04
DEN
Z-stat
9.50
39.87
10.74
40.65
19.11
29.95
46.46
97.67
p-value
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
NIQMC
Z-stat
68.25
62.23
4.44
61.07
40.43
44.62
66.17
67.02
p-value
0
0
4.49E-06
0
0
0
0
0
VIF
Z-stat
5.67
12.69
2.13
13.21
11.64
11.95
12.59
12.21
p-value
7.22E-09
0
0.017
0
0
0
0
0
Fig. 12 Results of different algorithms on image corner. (a) Input
image; (b) Patch of (a); (c) NPEA; (d) Patch of (c); (e) PIRE; (f) Patch
of (e); (g) LIME; (h) Patch of (g); (i) SRLIME; (j) Patch of (i); (k)
LECARM; (l) Patch of (k); (m) LSDD; (n) Patch of (m); (o) Zero-
DCE; (p) Patch of (o); (q) CSDGAN; (r) Patch of (q); (s) Proposed
method; (t) Patch of (s)
(a) PIRE
(b) LIME
(c) SRLIME
(d) NPLIE
Fig. 10 Assessment of proposed adaptive illumination adjustment. Top
row shows the results with traditional gamma (for illumination adjust-
ment on various approaches), and bottom row shows the results with
proposed adaptive illumination adjustment on various approaches
(a) Traditional gamma (for
illumination adjustment)
(b) Proposed adaptive illu-
mination adjustment
Fig. 11 Quantitative assessment of proposed adaptive illumination
adjustment
that the proposed adaptive illumination adjustment improves
the performance of PIRE [5], LIME [12], and NLPIE. There
123


===== PAGE 11 =====
Illumination estimation for nature preserving low-light image enhancement
is a slight improvement in lightness after using the pro-
posed adaptive illumination adjustment with PIRE. Fig. 10b
shows that there is a signiﬁcant improvement in lightness
when we use the proposed adaptive illumination adjust-
ment with LIME. Fig. 10c shows results of SRLIME with
traditional gamma and the proposed adaptive illumination
adjustment. The results of SRLIME degrades with proposed
adaptive illumination adjustment as its illumination esti-
mation is inadequate. The proposed adaptive illumination
adjustment improves the overall lightness in case of NPLIE
as shown in Fig. 10d.
The quantitative assessment of various algorithms with
traditionalgammaandproposedadaptiveilluminationadjust-
ment is shown in Fig. 11. It is shown in Fig. 11a and
11b that the values of all performance measures improve
for PIRE, LIME and NPLIE. However, the values of all
measures decrease in case of SRLIME. The decomposed
components from SRLIME algorithm are dependent on each
other because of the optimization. In attempt to remove
noise, SRLIME sometimes looses minor details which leads
to inadequate estimation of the components. The proposed
adaptive illumination adjustment uses the estimated illumi-
nation component for correction of lightness in the image,
which is inadequate in SRLIME and may contain the details
of reﬂectance. Thus, the illumination of SRLIME after the
proposed illumination adjustment causes over-enhancement
and distortion in the enhanced image. Hence, the pro-
posed adaptive illumination adjustment fails to achieve better
enhancement with SRLIME.
4.4 Quantitative assessment
The quantitative assessment is always desirable to vali-
date any experimental result. It may be easily veriﬁed that
a quantitative measure occasionally may give better value
for poorly enhanced image and inferior value for a high-
quality image and vice versa. There is no single universally
accepted quantitative assessment method available. There are
two types of measures for quantitative assessments of the
images: referential and non-referential measures. In case of
referential measures, good quality ground truth images are
required. It is nearly infeasible to ﬁnd an image database
having pairs of good quality illuminated and dark (with
varying illumination) version of the images. Even if such
data is created, the enhancement is limited by the qual-
ity of the illuminated reference images. That is, the value
of referential measure greatly depends upon the quality of
the reference image. Thus, we have used four quantitative
measures (frequently used in literature): Contrast Gain (CG)
[5], Normalized Discrete Entropy (DEN) [2], Information
maximization based No-reference quality metric (NIQMC)
[10], and Visual Information Fidelity (VIF) [44]. The mea-
sures for quantitative assessment was applied to all images in
all datasets except MIT-Adobe5k dataset. In MIT-Adobe5k
dataset, we have sampled 500 images that are either cap-
tured in night or contains low-light regions. Then, the mean
metric value was computed and reported on all images of
other datasets and sampled images of Adobe-MIT5k dataset.
Higher structural details contribute to better contrast. Thus,
higher CG is desirable for enhanced images. A higher value
of DEN represents more details and better enhancement.
A higher value of NIQMC denotes better enhancement and
more information in an image. Higher value of VIF indicates
better enhancement and more nature preserving enhance-
ment. The results of the quantitative assessment for various
algorithms are shown in Table 1. The best values for quantita-
tivemetricsarebold.ItmaybenotedfromTable1thatNPLIE
achieves the highest mean value (for CG, DEN, NIQMC,
and VIF). LIME achieves comparable results; however, it
may be observed from the visual analysis that LIME gener-
ates artifacts and provides poor color constancy. Therefore,
CG, DEN, NIQMC, and VIF metrics show that NPLIE is
superior to the other state-of-the-art algorithms.
Statistical assessment Analyzing all results manually may
infer erroneous conclusions. Thus, we perform a statistical
analysis of the results obtained by the proposed algorithm
and other contemporary algorithms. We perform paired z-
test [28] for the statistical analysis of the results. The pairs
of proposed and other algorithms are used to perform the z-
test. To assess the performance, the null hypothesis (H0) and
alternate hypothesis (H1) are:
H0: The performance of NPLIE and algorithm X is same.
H1: The performance of NPLIE is better than algorithm X.
We conduct one-tail testing to evaluate the enhancement. The
probability of rejecting H0 (i.e. p-value) is obtained using z-
distribution table [28]. We reject H0 for a signiﬁcantly small
p-valueandaccept H0 foralargerp-value.Wetestthehypoth-
esis for all four measures (i.e. CG, DEN, NIQMC, and VIF).
Table 2 shows the z-statistics and p-value for the pair of
NPLIE and other algorithms. It may be noted from Table 2
that all p-values are less than 0.05; thus, we can reject the null
hypothesis (H0) with at least a 0.05 level of signiﬁcance.
Hence, we can accept the alternate hypothesis that NPLIE
achieves better enhancement than the other algorithms.
4.5 Visual assessment
As discussed in the earlier section that there is no univer-
sally accepted quantitative measure for image assessment.
Thus, visual assessment of the results becomes a neces-
sity. An exhaustive visual assessment of the results from the
proposed algorithm and other contemporary algorithms is
performed. For easy reference, some of the regions of the
images are highlighted in colored boxes, and the magniﬁed
view is shown adjacent to each image. The sample results are
shown in Figs. 1 and 12-14.
123


===== PAGE 12 =====
K. Singh, A. S. Parihar
Fig. 13 Results of different algorithms on image road. (a) Input image;
(b) Patch of (a); (c) NPEA; (d) Patch of (c); (e) PIRE; (f) Patch of (e);
(g) LIME; (h) Patch of (g); (i) SRLIME; (j) Patch of (i); (k) LECARM;
(l) Patch of (k); (m) LSDD; (n) Patch of (m); (o) Zero-DCE; (p) Patch
of (o); (q) CSDGAN; (r) Patch of (q); (s) Proposed method; (t) Patch
of (s)
Fig. 14 Results of different algorithms on sample images. (a) Input image; (b) NPEA; (c) PIRE; (d) LIME; (e) SRLIME; (f) LECARM; (g) LSDD;
(h) Zero-DCE; (i) CSDGAN; (j) Proposed method
Table 3 Subjective assessment for various algorithms
NPEA
PIRE
LIME
SRLIME
LECARM
LSDD
Zero-DCE
CSDGAN
NPLIE
80.12
62.54
87.88
68.94
77.16
79.53
66.42
54.32
91.22
The enhanced images of NPEA shows that it provides
limited improvement of lightness, less contrast and over-
enhancement in some regions. The highlighted region (red
box) in Fig. 12(c) shows over-enhancement near cup. Fig.
13(c) shows less improvement in lightness. In Fig. 14(b),
enhanced image of NPEA is acceptable but contrast is
slightly low. PIRE provides limited enhancement as shown
in Fig. 12(e), 13(e), and 14(c). It can be noted from the
highlighted regions that PIRE fails to provide appropriate
lightness in the dark regions. The enhanced images of LIME
are shown in Fig. 12(g), 13(g), and 14 (d). Fig. 12(g) shows
LIME results in poor color constancy. Moreover, enhanced
image of LIME shows over-enhancement in Fig. 12(h).
SRLIME provides blurred details which causes poor visi-
bility of details as shown in Fig. 12(i), 13(i), and 14 (e).
Fig. 13(i) shows that SRLIME provides limited lightness.
Fig. 12(k), 13(k), and 14 (f) shows the results of LECARM. It
provides limited enhancement in low-light images and faded
colors as shown in Fig. 13(l). In Fig. 12(m), 13(m), and 14 (g),
LSDD shows blurring effect; thus, the details in the image is
unclear. Moreover, LSDD fails to achieve appropriate con-
trast. Zero-DCE provides limited enhancement as shown in
Fig. 12(o) and 13 (o). CSDGAN fails to improve the lightness
in the dark regions as shown in Fig. 12(q) and Fig. 13(q). Both
Zero-DCE and CSDGAN are deep-learning based meth-
ods and fails to achieve better results in generalized cases.
Fig. 12(s), 13(s) and 14 (h) shows the result of proposed
algorithm. It can be noted that the proposed algorithm pro-
vides signiﬁcant improvement of lightness in the low-light
images as highlighted in Fig. 12(t) and Fig. 13(t). More-
123


===== PAGE 13 =====
Illumination estimation for nature preserving low-light image enhancement
Table 4 Average computational time per image (in seconds)
NPEA
PIRE
LIME
SRLIME
LECARM
LSDD
Zero-DCE
CSDGAN
NPLIE
2.33
0.22
0.39
3.64
0.11
1.53
0.01(G)
0.01(G)
0.21
Fig. 15 Mean contrast gain for different pairs of (α,β). The contour
denotes that pairs inside the contour have values based on the contour
color. The colorbar represents the value of the contrast gain with respect
to the color from the surface plot
over, the proposed algorithm restricts over-enhancement in
light dominant region while enhancing the details of the dark
regions in the images with varying illumination condition as
shown in Fig.1(s), and 14(h). The visual comparison shows
that the proposed algorithm achieves the superior enhance-
ment of lightness with adequate contrast.
4.6 Subjective assessment
We conduct a subjective assessment on 100 low light images
selected from various image datasets: LECARM [42], NPEA
[53], ExDark Dataset [30], LOL Dataset [56], Enlighten-
GAN [17] and NASA Database [57]. We selected images
for distinct lightness conditions like, normal-light, low-light,
and non-uniform illumination. The input images and their
enhanced results are randomly shown to 20 participants for
scoring the enhancement. Each participant scored randomly
shown 20 images between 0(worst) to 100(best) based on
the visual aspect of the enhanced image. Table 3 shows the
summarized average scores for outputs of several algorithms.
Table 3 shows that the proposed algorithm achieves visually
pleasing results.
4.7 Parameter analysis
The proposed algorithm involves two regularization param-
eters α and β. To analyze the effect of these parameters, we
performed exhaustive experimentation, and it is found that
the values of α and β should vary between 0 and 1. Since
the optimization problem (5) is multi-objective optimization,
considering negative values of α and β does not make any
sense. As discussed in Sect. 3.2, parameters α and β reg-
ularize structural information and smoothening of textural
details, respectively. Thus, if either of the parameter α and β
have a value greater than 1, then one of the objectives (tex-
tural or structural details) will be dominant. For example,
if parameter α is increased beyond value 1, the structural
details will be dominant. Moreover, while capturing struc-
tural details, textural details may also get enhanced due to use
of the gradients in the related term. It may result in unnatural
enhanced images. Similarly, a large value of β may result
in smoothening of structural details as well. This results in
over-smoothen reﬁned illumination. To avoid the dominance
of the term related to the regularization parameter and limit
the adverse effect, we consider values of α and β between
0 and 1. To arrive at optimal values of the parameters α and
β, we perform experimentation over 500 images of diverse
illumination and consider their mean contrast gain as a mea-
sure of enhancement. However, to have a better correlation
between image qualities and values, we also analyze the best
values using visual analysis. The results are plotted in Fig. 15.
It may be noted that the best values of α and β are 0.5 and
0.1, respectively. Thus at α = 0.5, better structural details are
captured without over-enhancing textural details. In case of
α values less than 0.5, structural information of the image is
not captured adequately. On the other hand, for α greater than
0.5, textural details are captured along with structural details.
The parameter β at value 0.1 provides desirable smoothening
of textural details without losing structural details. For case
of β less than 0.1, smoothening of textural details is inad-
equate, while in case of β greater than 0.1 smoothening of
structural details occurs as well. In our experimentation, the
empirical values of parameters generate satisfactory results.
4.8 Computational analysis
The computational time complexity plays an important role
in the performance analysis of any algorithm. Thus, the com-
putational time analysis of the various algorithm is performed
on a set of 200 images with size 350x229. Table 4 shows
the average computational time per image. In Table 4, (G)
shows that the algorithm is running on ubuntu with titan-rtx
GPU and 128GB RAM. Zero-DCE and CSDGAN require
very lesser time then the proposed NPLIE. However, Zero-
DCE and CSDGAN are running on GPU whereas proposed
NPLIE is using CPU for computations. Furthermore, the
visual results of the proposed NPLIE is better than both
Zero-DCE and CSDGAN. We use MATLAB 2018a on Win-
dows10 running at 8GB RAM and core i5 processor @
123


===== PAGE 14 =====
K. Singh, A. S. Parihar
3.40GHz for CPU based algorithms. NPEA, SRLIME, and
LSDD are slower than other algorithms. These algorithms
are not useful for real-time applications due to slow conver-
gence. LECARM takes slightly lesser time than the proposed
algorithm. However, the visual quality of enhanced images
produced by the proposed method is much better.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a new approach to estimate illu-
mination from a low light image. The algorithm gives natural
contrast enhancement for low-light images. Further, we pro-
posed a new adaptive illumination adjustment which helps in
providing appropriate lightness to all regions in the images
with varying illumination. The experimental analysis shows
that the proposed algorithm improves dark regions of the
image without over-enhancing properly illuminated areas of
the same image. Our algorithm has various advantages over
other methods, which are:
– Works effectively both for images that contain low-light
and properly illuminated images with shaded regions.
– Produces nature preserving enhanced image with almost
no artifacts.
– Restrict light dispersion in the light dominant region
while improving lightness in the dark regions.
We performed exhaustive experimentation over a large num-
ber of images with different variations in the illumination
conditions to check the performance of the proposed method.
The visual assessment shows that the proposed method main-
tains color constancy over the object under varying light
conditions. The proposed algorithm outperforms most of the
state-of-the-art low-light image enhancement algorithms.
Funding In this study, there is no funding involved from any agency.
Declarations
Humans or animals performed This article does not contain any studies
involving humans or animals performed by any of the authors.
Conﬂict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of
interest.
References
1. Bychkovsky, V., Paris, S., Chan, E., Durand, F.: Learning photo-
graphic global tonal adjustment with a database of input / output
image pairs. In: The 24th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (2011)
2. Celik, T.: Two-dimensional histogram equalization and contrast
enhancement. Pattern Recognition 45(10), 3810–3824 (2012)
3. Chen, Z., Hu, Z., Sheng, B., Li, P., Kim, J., Wu, E.: Simpliﬁed
non-locally dense network for single-image dehazing. The Visual
Computer 36(10), 2189–2200 (2020)
4. Dhal, K.G., Das, A., Ghoshal, N., Das, S.: Variance based bright-
ness preserved dynamic histogram equalization for image contrast
enhancement. Pattern Recogn Image Anal 28(4), 747–757 (2018)
5. Fu, X., Liao, Y., Zeng, D., Huang, Y., Zhang, X., Ding, X.: A
probabilistic method for image enhancement with simultaneous
illumination and reﬂectance estimation. IEEE Trans Image Process
24(12), 4965–4977 (2015)
6. Fu, X., Zeng, D., Huang, Y., Liao, Y., Ding, X., Paisley, J.: A
fusion-based enhancing method for weakly illuminated images.
Signal Processing 129, 82–96 (2016)
7. Gautam, A., Singh, S.: Neural style transfer combined with efﬁ-
cientdet for thermal surveillance. The Visual Computer pp. 1–17
(2021)
8. Gharbi, M., Chen, J., Barron, J.T., Hasinoff, S.W., Durand, F.: Deep
bilateral learning for real-time image enhancement. ACM Trans.
Graph. 36(4), 1–2 (2017)
9. Ghosh, S., Gavaskar, R.G., Panda, D., Chaudhury, K.N.: Fast scale-
adaptive bilateral texture smoothing. IEEE Trans. Circuits. Syst.
Video. Technol. 30(7), 2015–2026 (2020)
10. Gu, K., Lin, W., Zhai, G., Yang, X., Zhang, W., Chen, C.W.:
No-reference quality metric of contrast-distorted images based on
information maximization. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 47(12), 4559–
4565 (2017)
11. Guo, C., Li, C., Guo, J., Loy, C.C., Hou, J., Kwong, S., Cong, R.:
Zero-reference deep curve estimation for low-light image enhance-
ment. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2020)
12. Guo, X., Li, Y., Ling, H.: Lime: Low-light image enhancement via
illumination map estimation. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 26(2),
982–993 (2017)
13. Guo, Z., Shuai, H., Liu, G., Zhu, Y., Wang, W.: Multi-level feature
fusion pyramid network for object detection. The Visual Computer
pp. 1–11 (2022)
14. Hao, S., Han, X., Guo, Y., Xu, X., Wang, M.: Low-light image
enhancement with semi-decoupled decomposition. IEEE Trans.
Multim. 22(12), 3025–38 (2020)
15. He, K., Sun, J., Tang, X.: Guided image ﬁltering. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 35(6), 1397–1409 (2013)
16. Hu, W., Wang, T., Wang, Y., Chen, Z., Huang, G.: Le-msfe-
ddnet: a defect detection network based on low-light enhancement
and multi-scale feature extraction. The Visual Computer pp. 1–15
(2021)
17. Jiang, Y., Gong, X., Liu, D., Cheng, Y., Fang, C., Shen, X., Yang, J.,
Zhou, P., Wang, Z.: Enlightengan: Deep light enhancement without
paired supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06972 (2019)
18. Jobson, D.J., Rahman, Z., Woodell, G.A.: Properties and perfor-
mance of a center/surround retinex. IEEE Trans. Image Process.
6(3), 451–462 (1997)
19. Joshi, P., Prakash, S.: Image enhancement with naturalness preser-
vation. The Visual Computer 36(1), 71–83 (2020)
20. Ju, M., Zhang, D., Wang, X.: Single image dehazing via an
improved atmospheric scattering model. The Visual Computer
33(12), 1613–1625 (2017)
21. Karr, B.A., Debattista, K., Chalmers, A.G.: Optical effects on HDR
calibration via a multiple exposure noise-based workﬂow. The
Visual Computer 37(5), 895–910 (2021)
22. Land, E.H.: Recent advances in Retinex theory and some implica-
tions for cortical computations: color vision and the natural image.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. United States of Am. 80(16), 5163 (1983)
23. Land, E.H.: Recent advances in Retinex theory. In: Central and
peripheral mechanisms of colour vision, pp. 5–17. Springer (1985)
123


===== PAGE 15 =====
Illumination estimation for nature preserving low-light image enhancement
24. Land, E.H., McCann, J.J.: Lightness and retinex theory. J. Opt.
Soci. Am. 61(1), 1–11 (1971)
25. Li, M., Liu, J., Yang, W., Sun, X., Guo, Z.: Structure-revealing low-
light image enhancement via robust Retinex model. IEEE Trans.
Image Process. 27(6), 2828–2841 (2018)
26. Li, M., Zhao, L., Zhou, D., Nie, R., Liu, Y., Wei, Y.: Aems: An
attention enhancement network of modules stacking for lowlight
image enhancement. The Visual Computer pp. 1–17 (2021)
27. Lin, R., Liu, J., Liu, R., Fan, X.: Global structure-guided learning
framework for underwater image enhancement. The Visual Com-
puter pp. 1–16 (2021)
28. Lind, D.A., Marchal, W.G., Wathen, S.A.: Statis. Techn. Business
Econom., 13th edn. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, USA (2014)
29. Liu, R., Ma, L., Zhang, J., Fan, X., Luo, Z.: Retinex-inspired
unrolling with cooperative prior architecture search for low-light
image enhancement. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10561–
10570 (2021)
30. Loh, Y.P., Chan, C.S.: Getting to know low-light images with the
exclusively dark dataset. Comput. Vision Image Understanding
178, 30–42 (2019)
31. Lv, F., Li, Y., Lu, F.: Attention guided low-light image enhance-
ment with a large scale low-light simulation dataset. Int. J. Comput.
Vision 129(7), 2175–2193 (2021)
32. Ma, L., Liu, R., Zhang, J., Fan, X., Luo, Z.: Learning deep context-
sensitive decomposition for low-light image enhancement. IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 22(12), 3025–38 (2021)
33. Parihar, A.S., Singh, K.: A study on retinex based method for image
enhancement. In: 2nd International Conference on Inventive Sys-
tems and Control, pp. 619–624 (2018)
34. Parihar, A.S., Singh, K., Rohilla, H., Asnani, G.: Fusion-based
simultaneous estimation of reﬂectance and illumination for low-
light image enhancement. IET Image Processing 15(7), 1410–1423
(2021)
35. Parihar, A.S., Singh, K., Rohilla, H., Asnani, G., Kour, H.:
A comprehensive analysis of fusion-based image enhancement
techniques. In: 2020 4th International Conference on Intelligent
Computing and Control Systems (ICICCS), pp. 823–828 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICICCS48265.2020.9120999
36. Parihar, A.S., Varshney, D., Pandya, K., Aggarwal, A.: A compre-
hensive survey on video frame interpolation techniques. The Visual
Computer pp. 1–25 (2021)
37. Parihar, A.S., Verma, O.P.: Contrast enhancement using entropy-
based dynamic sub-histogram equalisation. IET Image Processing
10(11), 799–808 (2016)
38. Parihar, A.S., Verma, O.P., Khanna, C.: Fuzzy-contextual con-
trast enhancement. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 26(4), 1810–1819
(2017)
39. Rahman, Z., Pu, Y.F., Aamir, M., Wali, S.: Structure revealing of
low-light images using wavelet transform based on fractional-order
denoising and multiscale decomposition. The Visual Computer
37(5), 865–880 (2021)
40. Rahman, Z.U., Jobson, D.J., Woodell, G.A.: Multi-scale retinex for
color image enhancement. In: IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing, vol. 3, pp. 1003–1006. IEEE (1996)
41. Ren, W., Liu, S., Ma, L., Xu, Q., Xu, X., Cao, X., Du, J., Yang,
M.H.: Low-light image enhancement via a deep hybrid network.
IEEE Trans. Image Process. 28(9), 4364–4375 (2019)
42. Ren, Y., Ying, Z., Li, T.H., Li, G.: Lecarm: Low-light image
enhancement using the camera response model. IEEE Trans. Cir-
cuits Syst. for Video Technol. 29(4), 968–981 (2019)
43. Shanmugavadivu, P., Balasubramanian, K., Muruganandam, A.:
Particle swarm optimized bi-histogram equalization for contrast
enhancement and brightness preservation of images. The Visual
Computer 30(4), 387–399 (2014)
44. Sheikh, H.R., Bovik, A.C.: Image information and visual quality.
IEEE Trans. Image Process. 15(2), 430–444 (2006)
45. Shen, L., Yue, Z., Feng, F., Chen, Q., Liu, S., Ma, J.: Msr-net:low-
light image enhancement using deep convolutional network (2017)
46. Singh, K., Parihar, A.S.: Variational optimization based single
image dehazing. J. Visual Commun. Image Represent. 79, 103241
(2021)
47. Song, X., Huang, J., Cao, J., Song, D.: Feature spatial pyramid
network for low-light image enhancement. The Visual Computer
pp. 1–11 (2022)
48. Wang, C., He, C., Xu, M.: Fast exposure fusion of detail enhance-
ment for brightest and darkest regions. The Visual Computer 37(5),
1233–1243 (2021)
49. Wang, C., Xing, X., Yao, G., Su, Z.: Single image Deraining via
deep shared pyramid network. The Visual Computer 37(7), 1851–
1865 (2021)
50. Wang, C., Zhang, H., Liu, L.: Total generalized variation-based
Retinex image decomposition. The Visual Computer 37(1), 77–93
(2021)
51. Wang, G., Gan, X., Cao, Q., Zhai, Q.: Mfanet: Multi-scale feature
fusion network with attention mechanism. The Visual Computer
pp. 1–12 (2022)
52. Wang, R., Zhang, Q., Fu, C.W., Shen, X., Zheng, W.S., Jia, J.:
Underexposed photo enhancement using deep illumination estima-
tion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2019)
53. Wang, S., Zheng, J., Hu, H., Li, B.: Naturalness preserved enhance-
ment algorithm for non-uniform illumination images. IEEE Trans.
Image Process. 22(9), 3538–3548 (2013)
54. Wang, Y., Wang, H., Cao, J.: A contour self-compensated network
for salient object detection. The Visual Computer 37(6), 1467–
1479 (2021)
55. Wang, Y., Yin, W., Zeng, J.: Global convergence of ADMM in
nonconvex Nonsmooth optimization. J. Sci. Comput. 78(1), 29–63
(2019)
56. Wei, C., Wang, W., Yang, W., Liu, J.: Deep Retinex decomposition
for low-light enhancement. In: British Machine Vision Conference
2018, Newcastle, UK, September 3-6, 2018, p. 155. BMVA Press
(2018)
57. Woodell, G.: Retinex image processing. Accessed:2019-08-13
58. Xu, K., Yang, X., Yin, B., Lau, R.W.: Learning to restore low-light
images via decomposition-and-enhancement. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR) (2020)
59. YU, N., LI, J., HUA, Z.: Fla-net: multi-stage modular network
for low-light image enhancement. The Visual Computer pp. 1–20
(2022)
60. Yu, S., Zhu, H.: Low-illumination image enhancement algorithm
based on a physical lighting model. IEEE Trans. Circuits. Syst.
Video Technol. 29(1), 28–37 (2019)
61. Yu, X., Li, H., Yang, H.: Two-stage image decomposition and color
regulator for low-light image enhancement. The Visual Computer
pp. 1–11 (2022)
62. Zhang, Q., Nie, Y., Zheng, W.S.: Dual illumination estimation for
robust exposure correction. Comput. Graphics Forum 38(7), 243–
252 (2019)
63. Zhang, Q., Yuan, G., Xiao, C., Zhu, L., Zheng, W.S.: High-quality
exposure correction of underexposed photos. In: Proceedings of the
26th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, MM ’18, p.
582–590. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA (2018)
64. Zhang, S., He, F.: Drcdn: learning deep residual convolutional
dehazing networks. The Visual Computer 36(9), 1797–1808 (2020)
65. Zhang,S.,He,F.,Ren,W.,Yao,J.:Jointlearningofimagedetailand
transmission map for single image dehazing. The Visual Computer
36(2), 305–316 (2020)
123


===== PAGE 16 =====
K. Singh, A. S. Parihar
66. Zhang, Y., Zhang, J., Guo, X.: Kindling the darkness: A practical
low-light image enhancer. In: 27th ACM International Conference
on Multimedia. MM ’19, pp. 1632–1640. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2019)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such
publishing agreement and applicable law.
KavinderSinghreceived his B.Tech.
degree in Computer Science &
Engineering in 2016 from A. K.
Technical University, Lucknow, India,
M.Tech. degree in Information sys-
tems from Delhi Technological Uni-
versity, New Delhi, India in 2018.
He is pursuing his PhD from Delhi
Technological University, New Delhi,
India. He joined Department of
Computer Science & Engineering
at Delhi Technological University
as Assistant Professor in 2020.
Currently, he is Assistant Profes-
sor in the Department of Com-
puter Science & Engineering at Delhi Technological University, New
Delhi, India. His research interest includes Image Processing, Pattern
Recognition, Object recognition and Computer Vision.
Anil Singh Parihar received his
B.Tech. Degree in Electronics and
Communication Engineering in 2005
from U. P. Technical University,
Lucknow, India, M.E. degree in
Electronics and Communication Engi-
neering from Delhi College of Engi-
neering, New Delhi, India in 2008,
and Ph.D. degree in the area of
applications of soft comping in
image processing in 2016. He joined
the Department of Information Tech-
nology at Delhi Technological Uni-
versity, Delhi, India as Assistant
Professor in 2010. Currently, he is
a Professor in the Department of Computer Science & Engineering
at Delhi Technological University, Delhi, India. His research inter-
est includes Image Processing, Pattern Recognition, Computer Vision,
Soft Computing and Evolutionary Algorithms.
123
